The dinner in Spanish is La Cena, spelt C-E-N-A, La Cena.
La cena.
Those in Spain will pronounce la cena.
So la cena the dinner.
Now to dine, which doesn't sound formal in Spanish as it does in English, to dine, you just make
la cena into a verb.
So how do you think that would sound?
Cenaar.
Senar, good.
So senar is to dine.
So how would you say I was dining or more naturally in English I was having dinner?
Senaba.
Good.
Now apart from I was having dinner, what else can that mean, Senaba?
He, she, it.
We're having dinner.
And who else?
You formal.
Good.
So we have all of those meanings there with the Abba.
So for this line in the past, we have abba for r verbs.
We are taking off our R and we're putting ABA as our key sound and then we are adding on MOS or N or S.
Quemar Q E M A R quemar in Spanish is to burn.
Quemar good.
How would you say he was burning the dinner?
He was burning the dinner.
Kemaba lasena.
Good.
Kemaba las cena.
And if you wanted to show that it was he that was burning the dinner, how would you do that?
Just El.
El Kemava Lasena.
Good.
And if you wanted to show that it was you, Fulman, you were banning the dinner?
Usted quemaba la cena.
Good.
So
El kemaba la cena.
He was burning, and then we say what he was burning, the dinner.
If we want to say
The dinner was burning, the dinner was getting burned.
We can't just say la senna kemauwa because we are waiting to hear what was the dinner burning
It feels incomplete.
So if you want to just say the dinner was burning, like the dinner was getting burnt in Spanish, we are going to say the dinner was burning itself.
What is itself?
So how would you say the dinner was burning?
The dinner was getting burnt.
The dinner was burning itself.
La cena se quemaba.
Very good.
Yeah.
That's it.
La cena se quemaba.
Good.
The position of lasena is also flexible.
You can say lasena se kemaba or you can put lasena afterwards.
How would that be?
Se kemaba la cena.
So it's flexible, unlike in English, because in English, well, we don't really change verbs so much.
There's not so many grammatical resources in English as there are in Spanish, for example.
So in English the word order is much more important than in Spanish to show what's going on
So we can say la cena se quemava or se quemava la cena.
Because we have se we understand that the dinner was getting burned.
There was nobody else there involved.
If you want to say I burn, like in the sun, in the sense of, you know, I get burnt, you're also going to use this structure
No?
You're gonna say I burn myself in the sun.
Now you understand you you're not burning yourself.
It just means I get burnt.
So sun is sol in was
N.
So I get burnt, I burn in the sun.
How would that be?
And sun is masculine
Me chemo en el sol.
Good.
You can't just say chemo en el sol.
Because this would mean that I burn something in the sun and we will be waiting to hear what you burn in the sun.
Me quemo en el sol.
If you want to say the sun burns me, this is another way you could put the sentence.
And there we are not using this self.
structure because we have the sun burns and then we have me telling us what it burns so it's complete.
So how would you say that the sun burns me
El sol mekema.
Good.
El sol mequema mequema el sol.
Either way.
Another example of a verb like this is romper.
Romper.
Rampere means maybe you can guess it.
What do you think Rampere means?
It's it's quite obscure the connection, but you might find it
Rupture to break.
To break.
Ramper.
So how would you say I break?
Rompo.
Rompo with a P.
I break it.
Lo Rompo.
Good.
I break it.
If you want to say it breaks, like it gets broken, it breaks all the time.
All the time is todo el
Tiempo literally all todo el tiempo the time.
Todo T O D O is all
So it breaks all the time.
It breaks itself.
It gets broken all the time.
How would you say that?
It breaks all the time
C rumpa todo.
The C got your attention, so you forgot to do something very important, which was to quickly go back to the two form and and be clear on what type of verb you're working with.
Good.
It breaks all the time.
So here we understand that it gets broken, it breaks, it breaks itself.
How would you say they break all the time?
Serompen todo el tiempo.
They break themselves.
Not literally that they are breaking themselves, just they get broken.
We don't have this get in Spanish, and this is how we get around it.
What was tonight?
Esta noche.
So we said esta is this for feminine words.
What was this for masculine words?
How did we say this car?
Este auto.
Este auto este coche good.
So este is this for masculine words.
And we have the E of El, like El auto, in este, este auto.
These cars are estos autos.
So we go from este to estos for the plural, not estes.
Estos.
Estos autos.
Now this might look irregular, but there is a logic there.
It's just different to the one that we might expect.
We have the E of El in este, and we have the Os of Los in Estos.
So we have the Ka
El coche?
Good.
And this car?
Este coche?
Good.
The cars
Los coches los coches and these cars estos coches estos coches so we have os in los and estos and we have in el en este
All of those you can make that and those now just by plucking out the T.
So if este auto is this car, how do you say that car?
S auto.
If estos coches or estos autos are these cars, how would you say those cars?
Esos autos.
Good.
So how would you say those ones?
And for those ones you can just use this word for those.
And imagine we're talking about masculine things or mixed things, things of mixed gender.
Those ones break all the time.
So now I'm waiting to hear what they break.
Esos rompen todo el tiempo.
What do they break all the time?
Esos se rompen.
Todo el tiempo.
Good.
So you'll have to listen out in Spanish for these verbs that want you to show it when the action isn't to something else.
It's transforming, not something else.
Se transforma.
It breaks, it's breaking, not something else.
Se rompe.
It's changing, not something else.
But here you don't need it.
Cambia from cambiar.
Cambia.
Being aware of that this occurs is enough and we will listen out and in real life get the conscious understanding and also an intuition about where we need to do this